---
title: "10 Myths About Scalable Parallel Programming Languages (Redux),  Part 6: Performance of Higher-Level Languages"
date: 2025-09-17
tags: ["Editorial", "Archival Posts / Reprints", "Language Comparison", "Performance", "Benchmarks"]
series: ["10 Myths About Scalable Parallel Programming Languages Redux"]
summary: "The sixth archival post from the 2012 IEEE TCSC blog series with a current reflection on it"
authors: ["Brad Chamberlain"]
---

### Background

In 2012, I wrote a series of eight blog posts entitled "Myths About
Scalable Parallel Programming Languages" for the IEEE Technical
Community on Scalable Computing&nbsp;(TCSC).  In it, I described
discouraging attitudes that our team encountered when talking about
developing Chapel and then gave my personal rebuttals to them.  That
series has generally been unavailable for many years, so for its 13th
anniversary, we're reprinting the original series here on the Chapel
blog, along with new commentary about how well or poorly the ideas
have held up over time.  For a more detailed introduction to both the
original series and these reprints, please see [the first article]({{<
relref 10myths-part1 >}}) in this series.


This month, we're reprinting the series' sixth article, originally
published on September 17, 2012.  As a bonus, this is the first in the
series to contain not one, but _two_ myths!  Comments in the sidebar
and in [the sections that follow the reprint]({{<relref
"#reflections-on-the-original-article">}}) contain my current thoughts
and reflections on it.


---

### The Original Article, Reprinted

Myths About Scalable Parallel Programming Languages:<br>
Part 6: Performance of Higher-Level Languages
{.big}

This is the sixth in a series of blog articles that I’m writing with
the goal of describing and responding to some of the misconceptions
about scalable parallel programming languages that our team encounters
when describing our work designing and implementing Chapel
(https://chapel-lang.org).

For more background on Chapel or this series of articles, please refer
to [part 1]({{< relref 10myths-part1
>}}#the-original-article-reprinted); subsequent myths are covered in
parts [2]({{< relref 10myths-part2
>}}#the-original-article-reprinted), [3]({{< relref 10myths-part3
>}}#the-original-article-reprinted), [4]({{< relref 10myths-part4
>}}#the-original-article-reprinted), and [5]({{< relref 10myths-part5
>}}#the-original-article-reprinted).

{{<pullquote>}}

A danger that we face by holding up MPI as the performance standard to
beat is falling into the trap of believing that it can’t be beaten.

{{</pullquote>}}


#### Myth #6: High-Level Languages Can't Compete with MPI.

In contemporary HPC conversations, MPI is often held up as the gold
standard for performance, similar to how the 4-minute mile or Mach-2
served as idealized standards to beat in the 1950’s.  And there’s good
reason for this attitude: since the vast majority of the largest, most
scalable HPC applications {{<sidenote "right"
"are written in MPI today">}}And today as well, 13 years
later.{{</sidenote>}}, it stands to reason that if you can’t beat MPI,
then you’d better have some other compelling reason to justify your
programming model’s existence, such as improved programmability,
generality, or other capabilities.

Yet, a danger that we face as a community by holding up MPI as _the_
performance standard to beat is falling into the trap of believing
that it _can’t_ be beaten, at least not by a higher-level language.
Because the fact is that it can.

Here’s an example that's now {{<sidenote "right"
"a bit more than a decade old" -6>}}We'll see newer examples, and ones
written in Chapel, in the commentary section below.{{</sidenote>}}
[[1]({{<relref "#bibliography">}})], showing implementations of the
NAS MG benchmark (class C) written in ZPL and {{<sidenote "right"
"Co-Array Fortran (CAF)">}}Since the original publication, I've been
trained to refer to these more properly as Fortran 2008's
coarrays.{{</sidenote>}} outperforming and out-scaling the reference
version written in Fortran+MPI on a Cray T3E.

{{< figure src="./NasMgClassC.jpg">}}

Anyone familiar with Partitioned Global Address Space (PGAS) languages
like CAF and ZPL can probably guess why these languages outperformed
MPI in this experiment: On the Cray T3E, the most efficient means of
communicating between processors was not the two-sided message passing
exemplified by MPI’s send and receive calls; instead, better
performance could be obtained by using one-sided put/get calls that
permit one compute node to directly write to/read from another node’s
memory without involving the CPU.  Because CAF and ZPL were both
implemented in terms of these one-sided puts and gets, they could
perform and scale better than MPI.  Other PGAS languages have
demonstrated similar results for a variety of computations in the
intervening years.

In addition to outperforming the reference MPI code, the ZPL version
was also significantly more succinct and elegant, due to the
language’s support for global-view data parallelism, which benefits
multigrid computations like NAS MG.  [Last month’s article]({{< relref
"10myths-part5#multiresolution-languages-and-heroic-compilation"
>}}) contained an illustrative code
excerpt from the ZPL version of the NAS MG benchmark; the following
graph shows an overall code size comparison between all of the
languages considered in this study:

{{< figure src="./NasMgLineCounts.jpg">}}

The takeaway is that high-level global-view languages like ZPL, HPF,
and Single-Assignment C (SAC) [[2]({{<relref "#bibliography">}})] tend
to be much more succinct than programming models like MPI and CAF
(note that the HPF version did not appear on the graph above because
its memory requirements for NAS MG class C exceeded the T3E’s
capacity; SAC was simply not supported on the T3E at the time of this
experiment).  Browsing the sources, most users would conclude that the
higher-level languages are not only shorter, but also tend to be more
readable and modifiable.  The primary difference between MPI/CAF and
the high-level languages is that the former rely on the Single-Program
Multiple-Data (SPMD) programming model, which necessitates a certain
amount of code for bookkeeping and communication management between
the program images.

{{<pullquote>}}

Higher-level languages permit the user to focus on what needs to be
communicated, and approximately when, yet without wrestling with the
mechanical details of how.

{{</pullquote>}}

In addition to being more succinct than the MPI reference version, the
ZPL version was also more flexible: it permitted an arbitrary problem
size and number of processors to be specified at execution-time, and
for the data to be decomposed in any subset of the three logical
dimensions of the problem space.  In contrast, the MPI reference
version only supports a 3D data decomposition and requires the problem
size and number of processors to be fixed at compile time and limited
to powers of two.  These restrictions are not imposed by MPI itself; a
more general version could be written, but doing so would require
additional programmer effort and would almost certainly result in a
larger, more complex code.

This example demonstrates that higher-level languages like ZPL _can_
outperform MPI.  But we must also be clear that the experiment above
evaluates specific instances of a given benchmark running in a
specific experimental setting.  The results could easily differ if we
were to modify the benchmarks or to use different target architectures
or implementations of MPI and ZPL.

Let’s start by considering changes to the MPI version of the
benchmark.  An MPI enthusiast could point out that the Fortran+MPI
implementation would likely have been more competitive with ZPL on
architectures like the Cray T3E if it had used MPI-2’s one-sided
communication routines (or, even better, the new remote memory access
capabilities available in MPI-3).  And they would be right.  However,
note that once a user starts to rely on one set of MPI routines for a
given platform and a second set for another, many of the portability
benefits of MPI as an end-user programming model begin to unravel.
This is not intended as a slight against MPI—keep in mind that MPI was
not originally intended to serve as an end-user programming model to
the degree that it has in practice; rather, higher-level libraries and
languages were meant to be layered on top of it.

{{<pullquote>}}

High-level languages are not only able to compete with MPI in terms of
performance, but can also offer a better overall solution for the
end-user.

{{</pullquote>}}

This, then, is one of the benefits of using higher-level languages
like ZPL and Chapel: Such languages permit the typical user to focus
on _what_ needs to be communicated, and approximately _when_, yet
without wrestling with the mechanical details of _how_.  In practice,
the ZPL compiler mapped communication regions down to {{<sidenote
"right" "a pair of function calls">}}Though I consider this approach
to communication to have been a huge success in ZPL, Chapel does not
take the same approach.  The reason is that ZPL had a very constrained
model of control flow, in which the whole program could be considered
a sequential series of data-parallel steps.  As a result, the code
generated by the compiler was a very symmetric SPMD-based
implementation in which all copies of the program had a good sense of
what all the other copies would be doing at any given time.  This
permitted sends and receives to be matched to one another, as in
hand-coded MPI, for example.

By contrast, Chapel has such a general, asynchronous model of
execution that there's no guarantee that the threads of the distinct
copies of the SPMD implementation will be doing anything related to
one another at any given time.  As a result, all communication in
Chapel has to be truly one-sided and un-anticipatable by the other
program instances.  This makes ZPL's coordinated approach
inapplicable.{{</sidenote>}} on each of the sending and receiving
sides, demarcating where the data transfer could/should take place.
These calls were referred to as the _Ironman interface_ [[3]({{<relref
"#bibliography">}})] and were designed to be mapped to whatever
mechanisms best suited the target architecture.  On the Cray T3E, they
were mapped down to the SHMEM calls implementing one-sided puts and
gets, while on a Linux cluster, they were mapped down to non-blocking
MPI sends and receives.  As the following graph illustrates, this
resulted in performance that was much more comparable with the
hand-coded Fortran+MPI since now both programming models were using
the same technology, and one that serves as a good fit for the target
architecture:

{{< figure src="./NasMgClassCLinux.jpg">}}

The result in ZPL was an approach that benefited everyone:
Programmers could reason about locality and optimize for it in a
single source program without binding their code too tightly to any
given architecture or means of communication; the compiler could
optimize the placement of the communication using fairly
straightforward dependence analysis [[4]({{<relref
"#bibliography">}})]; and the runtime could map the communication
calls down to a mechanism that suited the target architecture.  This
is why I would argue that high-level languages are not only able to
compete with MPI in terms of performance, but can also offer a better
overall solution for the end-user.

But to be clear, achieving this is not trivial.  The ZPL effort was a
significant one, and yet the result was insufficiently flexible and
general to ever achieve widespread adoption.  Within the Chapel
project, we are striving to repeat ZPL’s successes, yet in a much more
general language setting.  Chapel’s greater generality has led to
challenges of its own, to the extent that {{<sidenote "right"
"we have not yet been able to">}}But we have now!  Again, see the
commentary section below.{{</sidenote>}} deliver results as compelling
as the NAS MG experiment above (though it must be noted that our focus
to date has been far more on the dynamic and user-defined aspects of
the language than on regular, hierarchical stencil codes like NAS MG).
Knowing the level of effort required to achieve results like ZPL’s is
also why Chapel was designed with the multiresolution philosophy of
providing "manual overrides."  For example, while Chapel supports
high-level data parallel operations as in ZPL, programmers are also
able to do explicit SPMD programming and even {{<sidenote "right"
"message passing">}}Though I'm not certain, I'm fairly confident I was
speaking hypothetically at the time—like, "nothing specifically
prevents a user from doing message passing in Chapel if they so
desire."  However, one of our early and enterprising users developed a
basic [MPI package for Chapel](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/modules/packages/MPI.html)
a few years after this was written that is still available today.
Notably, it was contributed just a little over a year after an April
Fool's [social media
post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/brad-chamberlain-3ab358105_hpc-activity-7312992537013587969-TTqj/)
had joked about just such a thing.{{</sidenote>}} within Chapel.

This acknowledgment of the level of effort required to compete with MPI’s performance brings us to our next myth, a short one:

{{<pullquote>}}

Developing a new language tends to require a significant effort in
terms of implementation and optimization, proportional to how
aggressive its feature set is.

{{</pullquote>}}

#### Myth #7: If a parallel language does not have good performance today, it never will.

Many prospective users of a new language will tend to evaluate it by
downloading it, reading and executing some benchmark codes, and making
a judgment based on the resulting performance.  Although this approach
can serve {{<sidenote "left"
"as a very concrete and satisfying activity">}}More than that, I think
it's a very natural reaction to think "I've got a problem I want to
solve now, so how well does this emerging language work at present?  I
can't really afford to wait for it to improve."{{</sidenote>}}, I
believe it is inherently short-sighted.  The performance that a new
language obtains is not necessarily indicative of its ultimate
performance—you only need to look as far back as Java to see this
lesson in practice.

Developing a new language tends to require a significant effort in
terms of implementation and optimization, and the level of effort
required tends to be proportional to how aggressive its feature set
is.  Many of the failed HPC languages from recent decades have turned
in demonstrations of reasonable performance and scalability—like CAF
and ZPL in the NAS MG experiment above.  Yet, most have also failed to
be broadly adopted, typically due to being overly restrictive, either
in terms of generality (ZPL falls into this category) or portable
performance (this is arguably why CAF {{<sidenote "right"
"hasn’t yet been more broadly adopted">}}Though I'm not very involved
in the Fortran community, I believe that adoption of coarrays has
increased since this was originally published; or maybe I've just
become more aware of some of their use cases.{{</sidenote>}}).  For
this reason, it seems to me that any successful parallel language will
likely need to be more general and feature-rich than its predecessors
were, and will therefore probably require a greater investment in time
and level of effort before achieving broad success.

So what is to be done?  Just keep putting resources into prospective
languages like Chapel that purport to be a step in the right
direction?  Well, yes, but certainly not blindly.  My point is that we
should not evaluate languages based on what their implementations
happen to achieve today, but by reasoning about what they will, or
will not, be able to achieve over time.  This tends to be a far less
straightforward form of evaluation because it requires thinking more
deeply about the compilation and implementation process, but it’s far
from impossible.  In addition to "Would I benefit from using a mature
version of this language?" users should also ask themselves "Are there
features in this language that will inherently prevent it from
achieving performance that is competitive with Fortran/C or MPI/SHMEM
or even ZPL/CAF?"  If so, then the language team should be alerted to
the problem before wasting more time and money on the effort; but if
not, then perhaps the new language does have a chance of success,
given sufficient time, effort, and patience.

This brings us to this month’s conclusions:

#### Counterpoint #7: The performance potential of a novel language should be evaluated by studying ways in which its features enable and/or limit its ability to achieve good performance and projecting its implementation strategy forward in time; not by simply measuring the performance that it happens to produce at a given point in time.

and:

#### Counterpoint #6: Well-designed high-level languages can outperform MPI while also supporting better performance portability, programmability, and productivity.

Tune in next time for more myths about scalable parallel programming
languages.



#### Bibliography

[1] B. Chamberlain, S. Deitz, L. Snyder, [A Comparative Study of the
NAS MG Benchmark across Parallel Languages and
Architectures](https://research.cs.washington.edu/zpl/papers/data/Chamberlain00.pdf),
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Supercomputing, 2000.

[2] S. Scholz, [Single Assignment C — Functional Programming Using Imperative Style](https://www.sac-home.org/_media/publications:pdf:sac-overview-norwich-94.pdf), Proceedings of IFL `94, Norwich, UK, 1994.

[3] B. Chamberlain, S.-E. Choi, L. Snyder, [A Compiler Abstraction for Machine Independent Parallel Communication Generation](https://research.cs.washington.edu/zpl/papers/data/Chamberlain97.pdf), Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages and Compilers for Parallel Computing, 1997.

[4] S.-E. Choi, <u>Machine Independent Communication Optimization</u>, PhD thesis, University of Washington, March 1999.


---

### Reflections on the Original Article

For me, this article remains very relevant 13 years later, in part due
to attitudes about MPI still being a gold standard for performance,
but particularly regarding the sense that if a language doesn't
perform well today, it never will.  It's these sorts of attitudes that
keep us stuck in the mode of adding new technologies into our mash-up
of HPC programming models each time we introduce a new level or flavor
of hardware parallelism (C++ + MPI + OpenMP + CUDA anyone?).
Meanwhile the rest of the world advances to new languages that make
leaps and bounds in terms of productivity and safety, like Go, Swift,
Julia, or Rust.

Where the "Reflections" sections in previous installments of this
series have typically commented on a few different aspects of the
original article, in this one I'm going to focus on more of a single
topic: summarizing some comparisons of Chapel's performance and
productivity—relative to MPI and other HPC programming models—that
have been done since the original article was published.


#### Comparing Chapel with MPI

If it's not already self-evident, the reason the original version of
this article focused on comparisons between ZPL and MPI was simply
because Chapel had not yet reached the point where it was able to
compete with MPI for key benchmarks—even ones as straightforward as
STREAM Triad.  So ZPL was the best we had available for making our
arguments at the time.

However, in the years that followed its publication, we began closing
the gap.  And then we went further, resulting in benchmark results
like the following one from a presentation entitled _Chapel's
Language-based Approach to Performance Portability_, presented at SIAM
CSE19:

{{< figure class="fullwide" src="./RA-Perf-2019.jpg">}}

This graph focuses on the HPC Challenge Random Access benchmark (HPCC
RA), which asks the user to make random updates to random elements of
a distributed table (1D array) as quickly as possible, measured in
Giga-Updates Per Second (GUPS).  The performance results shown were
gathered on 512 nodes of a Cray XC, for a total of 18k cores.  And, as
can be seen, it's a case where Chapel outscales and outperforms MPI.

#### Introduction to HPCC RA in Chapel

To understand why Chapel beats MPI, let's look at the main
computational loop, which is written in Chapel as:

```chapel
forall (_, r) in zip(Updates, randomValues()) do
  T[r & indexMask].xor(r);
```

Some of the key variables used by this loop are as follows:

* `Updates` — a _domain_, or index set, representing the number of
  updates that need to be made: `{0..<numUpdates}`.  More importantly,
  it is a _distributed_ domain, which means that parallel loops over it
  will result in distributed multicore execution.

* `randomValues()` — a user-defined parallel iterator that generates
  random numbers using the algorithm specified by the RA benchmark.

* `T` — a distributed array of `atomic` integers representing the
  table whose elements will be updated.  The use of atomic values
  avoids the potential for races if two tasks try to update the same
  element {{<sidenote "right" "simultaneously">}}HPCC RA actually
  permits a certain number of such races, but this Chapel version is
  race-free.{{</sidenote>}}

Given those variables, this loop says "In parallel (`forall`) iterate
in a lock-step manner (`zip`) over (i) the set of `Updates` that need
to be made and (ii) the `randomValues()`, dropping the update number on
the floor (`_`) and calling the random value `r`.  For each iteration,
update the element of `T` corresponding to `r` using an atomic `xor`
operation."  Because `Updates` is a distributed domain and
`randomValues()` is a parallel iterator, this results in all of the
cores on all of the compute nodes making random updates to the table
in parallel.

{{<pullquote>}}

By describing the computation using high-level parallel abstractions,
the compiler and runtime are able to optimize the program in ways that
make good use of the target hardware.

{{</pullquote>}}

#### Explaining Chapel's Performance Advantage

Chapel's performance advantage over MPI for this benchmark stems from
two main factors:

1) On the Cray XC (and HPE Cray EX), Chapel implements the atomic
updates performed by this benchmark using the network hardware's
native support for atomic operations.  At scale, this provides a speed
advantage over doing the traditional buffering, sends, and receives
that are used in {{<sidenote "right" "the MPI version of the code">}}I
should note that in addition to the overheads of message-passing, the
scalability of the MPI reference version is also hurt by a condition
set by the HPCC RA benchmark that limits how many updates can be
batched together at a time.  This is the reason for the flattening of
MPI's curve: as the number of locales approaches that batching limit,
it reduces the amortization benefits of message passing.  In contrast,
the Chapel version does all of its updates in a fine-grained manner,
so isn't affected by the batching limits.{{</sidenote>}}


2) The `forall` indicates to the compiler that the iterations of the
loop are order-independent.  This permits it to implement the atomic
updates in an asynchronous manner such that each task will fire off
updates as fast it can, only waiting for them to complete once it's
out of work and about to exit the loop.  The impact of this second
optimization is responsible for the performance jump between the two
Chapel lines in the graph above, where the lower one measures
performance with the optimization turned off, such that each task
waits for its atomic operation to complete before going on to the
next one.

These two factors illustrate some of the key benefits that parallel
languages can provide in terms of performance optimizations: By
describing the computation using high-level parallel abstractions
("Use all the distributed compute resources to perform these updates
in parallel"), the compiler and runtime are able to generate and
optimize the program in ways that make good use of the target
hardware—in this case by leveraging important hardware features
like network atomics and asynchronous operations.

Contrast this with parallel programming models like MPI, in which the
user doesn't just specify _what_ the computation should do, but also
_how_ it should be implemented on the distributed system—in the case
of HPCC RA, by using explicit buffering and message passing.
Specifying those details constrains the implementation, preventing the
use of fine-grained asynchronous operations like the ones used by
Chapel.  Moreover, since MPI is a library, any optimizations must be
implemented by the user rather than benefiting from the help of a
compiler.

{{<pullquote>}}

Imposing an SPMD programming model on the user results in additional
bookkeeping and detail management that is not present in a global-view
language like Chapel.

{{</pullquote>}}

#### Productivity Comparisons

Another benefit that this example illustrates is the productivity that
can come from language-based parallelism.  This can be seen by
inspecting the MPI code that is equivalent to the Chapel loop above
(squint or zoom way in):

{{< figure class="fullwide" src="./RA-MPI.jpg">}}

In this code, the red lines are the MPI calls that implement the
communication and inter-node coordination, while the blue lines are
comments.  Why is there so much code?  In part, it's because C is an
older and lower-level language than Chapel, so doesn't have
abstractions like iterators, zippered iteration, or type inference.
In part, it's because imposing an SPMD programming model on the
user results in additional bookkeeping and detail management
that isn't present in a global-view programming language like Chapel
that supports distributed domains and arrays.  And in part it's
because all of the communication and buffer management must be done
explicitly by the programmer.

Note that the comment at the start of the code, which deciphers what
the rest of it does:

```c
/* Perform updates to main table. The scalar equivalent is:
 *
 *     for (i=0; i<NUPDATE; i++) {
 *       Ran = (Ran << 1) ^ (((s64Int) Ran < 0) ? POLY : 0);
 *       Table[Ran & (TABSIZE-1)] ^= Ran;
 *     }
 */
```

is similar in size and clarity to the original, equivalent Chapel loop
that we started with:

```chapel
forall (_, r) in zip(Updates, randomValues()) do
  T[r & indexMask].xor(r);
```

In short, we have concise, reasonably clear code that outperforms and
outscales the much longer and more detailed MPI equivalent by virtue
of enabling compiler optimizations.  A good counter-example to Myth
#6.


#### Comparing Chapel with Exstack and Conveyors

Since conducting this 2019 study of RA, our team has not done many
additional comparisons with MPI, in large part because that was the
year we turned our attention to supporting flagship Chapel
applications like [CHAMPS]({{<relref "7qs-laurendeau">}}) and
[Arkouda]({{<relref "7qs-reus">}}).  (And for some reason, users with
a working Chapel application don't seem to want to write a second
version of it in MPI for purposes of comparison!)

That said, we did do a similar comparison with the SHMEM-based Exstack
and Conveyors libraries, which is worth a mention here despite not
being MPI-based because it features:

* a more recent vehicle for comparisons: [Bale
Indexgather](https://github.com/jdevinney/bale/#readme)

* a newer system and network: HPE Cray EX running Slingshot-11

* a larger system scale: 4096 compute nodes (over half a million cores)

* a use of aggregators, which were instrumental to [Arkouda's
distributed sort performance]({{<relref
"announcing-chapel-2.0#arkouda-interactive-data-analysis-at-scale"
>}})

Like HPCC RA, this example demonstrates another case where
straightforward Chapel code outperforms and outscales a lower-level,
more explicit approach.  Since this article is running long, I won't
go through it blow by blow, but will summarize with this cartoon of
the "gather" operation that Indexgather computes:

{{< figure src="./Bale-IG.jpg">}}

this loop of Chapel code that implements it:

```chapel
forall (d, i) in zip(Dst, Inds) do
  d = Src[i];
```

these listings of the equivalent code in Exstack and Conveyors:

{{< figure class="fullwide" src="./Bale-IG-SHMEM.jpg">}}

and this performance graph showing the resulting performance and
scalability:

{{< figure class="fullwide" src="./Bale-IG-Perf.jpg">}}

Like the HPCC RA case, this is an example where the Chapel compiler is
able to apply transformations in order to optimize the communications
required by the computation.  In this case, it's Chapel's
`--auto-aggregation` optimization, which coarsens what would otherwise
be fine-grained puts and gets to amortize their overheads.  The
SHMEM-based technologies do this as well, but not as scalably.


#### Other, More Recent Comparisons

Back on MPI comparisons, the following recent studies are other notable
cases where Chapel performs competitively with, or better than, MPI:

* This [comparison between Chapel and MPI]({{<relref
"bns4/#comparison-with-cmpiopenmp">}}) in the context of a cavity flow
solver, written by Jeremiah Corrado as part of his [_Navier-Stokes in
Chapel_]({{<relref "navier-stokes-in-chapel">}}) blog series.  This
study is somewhat different than the ones above in that it focuses on
regular, structured communications rather than optimizing irregular
fine-grained remote operations.

* A recent multi-language comparison of distributed radix sorting
performed by Michael Ferguson et al. that's summarized in [this GitHub
repository](https://github.com/mppf/distributed-lsb#readme).  This
November, a more detailed write-up of the study that includes
OpenSHMEM, Conveyors, and Lamellar, in addition to Chapel and MPI,
will be published as part of the [PAW-ATM
workshop](https://sourceryinstitute.github.io/PAW/) at
[SC25](https://sc25.supercomputing.org/), under the title _Comparing
Distributed-Memory Programming Frameworks with Radix Sort_.

&nbsp;<br>

{{<pullquote>}}

HPC is, by nature, an impatient branch within the impatient field of
computer science.

{{</pullquote>}}

#### Wrapping Up

Wrapping up, I want to note that while this article demonstrates that
concise ZPL and Chapel programs _can_ outperform MPI due to the
optimization opportunities that their high-level abstractions permit,
readers should not conclude that Chapel will necessarily always
outperform MPI.  The cases highlighted in this article are notable in
that they received particular attention due to their importance as
fundamental Chapel idioms (HPCC RA and Navier-Stokes-style stencil
operations) or to user applications (Bale Indexgather and distributed
sorting).  Chapel has many other opportunities for optimization ahead
that have not received a similar amount of attention to date.

HPC is, by nature, an impatient branch within the impatient field of
computer science.  But note that in the 13 years since this article
was written, Chapel has grown from the point of not being able to
compete with MPI for something as simple as STREAM Triad, to being
able to compete with it, and then beat it in cases like HPCC RA.  It
has gone on to scale to over a thousand GPUs and a million processor
cores in the context of production-grade user applications.  A
{{<sidenote "right" "little bit of patience">}}While in Milano for
IPDPS this summer, I learned that its Duomo took nearly six centuries
to complete.  Oh for even a tiny fraction of that kind of patience
from the HPC community!{{</sidenote>}} can go a long way.

Is Chapel perfect?  No, unfortunately not (yet), and we'll come back
to that topic in the final article in this series.  But first, in next
month's penultimate installment, we'll look at the myth that
successful languages are necessarily small / minimal.  See you then!
